

# Differential-Expression-Analysis

We assume that there are fastq files (raw sequences) in our hand. If not, you can visit this https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK242621/ website address to download fastq files from NCBI/SRA. For installation of SRA toolkit: https://ncbi.github.io/sra-tools/install_config.html.

# Quality control of fastq files (Step 1)

FASTQC tool is used for the quality control of fastq files. If base quality and adapter context are good, we can pass to further step, however, ıf not, bases with poor quality are removed from fastq files to reduce technical bias of RNA-seq analysis. To remove those bases, cutadapt is useful tool. We assume that our fastq files have a lot of adapter sequences (synthetic sequences) and so we want to remove them. For instance:

~$ cutadapt -a forward_adapter_sequence -A reverse_adapter_sequence -o out.1.fastq -p out.2.fastq reads.1.fastq reads.2.fastq (paired-end trimming). In here, -a argument corresponds forward adapter sequences, -A argument corresponds reverse adapter sequences, -o argument corresponds output file (adapter trimmed fastq file), and -p argument corresponds paired-end mode. 
In the single-end trimming, ~$ cutadapt -a AACCGGTT -o output.fastq input.fastq or  cutadapt -g AACCGGTT -o output.fastq input.fastq. Cutadapt -a argument corresponds 3' adapter sequences, however -g corresponds 5' adapter sequences. Thus, overrepresent (contaminant) adapter sequences are removed by using cutadapt tool like examples above.

# Alignment Process (Step 2)

Each read in FASTQ files is aligned to reference genome to fit them to one or more genomic coordinates (namely, relevant genes). This step is achieved by several tools such as HISAT2, TopHat, so on. Refence genome is indexed by using aligners before aligment step. The purpose of reference genome index is sorting of genomic coordinates and this reduces alignment-process timing. We are utilizing HISAT2 aligner tool to make aligment process in here.

Reference genome indexing:

~$ hisat2-build reference_genome.fa index_name

(reference genome file should be fasta format (e.g: .fa or .fasta)

Aligment examples with HISAT2:

~$ hisat2 --dta -p --rna-strandness R -x reference_genome_indexes -U input.fastq -S output.sam 

The meaning of the arguments:

--dta argument: Report alignments tailored for transcript assemblers including StringTie. With this option, HISAT2 requires longer anchor lengths for de novo discovery of splice sites. This leads to fewer alignments with short-anchors, which helps transcript assemblers improve significantly in computation and memory usage.

-p argument: Launch NTHREADS parallel search threads (default: 1). Threads will run on separate processors/cores and synchronize when parsing reads and outputting alignments.

--rna-strandness argument: Specify strand-specific information: the default is unstranded. For single-end reads, use F or R. 'F' means a read corresponds to a transcript. 'R' means a read corresponds to the reverse complemented counterpart of a transcript. For paired-end reads, use either FR or RF.

-x argument: The basename of the index for the reference genome.

-U argument: This argument is fitted for only single-end reads.

-S argument: This argument is used for generation of SAM files.

# The file conversion (Step 3)

In this step, SAM files are converted to BAM files by using Samtools. BAM files have less storage-load than SAM files and they can be thought as the compressed SAM files.

~$ samtools sort -@ 6 -o file.bam file.sam

The meaning of the arguments:

sort argument: SAM files are sorted by genomic coordinates or names. The sorting based on genomic coordinates or names is performed according to purpose of downstream analysis. 

-@ argument: The number of threads.

-o argument: This argument is used for generation of files with .bam extension.

# Gene-level quantification (Step 4)

All transcripts belonging to each gene are quantified across samples by using the featureCounts tool and this is made with bam files. After quantification, featureCounts generates an expression matrix in which each column represents individual sample, but each row represents individual gene.

~$ featureCounts patient1.bam patient2.bam control1.bam control2.bam -a annotation_file.gtf -o names_of_output_file -g gene_id -T 6 -s 2 -Q 50 --verbose

The meaning of arguments:

-a argument: This argument is required for using of gene annotation file (.GTF). According to annotation file, each transcript is assigned to its relevant genes.

-o argument: Output file is generated by this argument. Output is an expression matrix in which rows represent each gene, but columns represent each sample.

-g argument: This argument is used for gene-level quantification.

-T: This argument determines the number of threads.

-s argument: This argument assings strandness information. If it is used as the wrong then each transcript is quantified for wrong a gene and this effects downstream analysis results.

-Q argument: This argument filters transcripts with low mapping quality score. If mapping quality is low, it means that the same transcipt is aligned to at least two (or more) genomics coordinates (namely, genes) and this contributes to wrong gene-level quantification.

--verbose argument: Output verbose information for debugging, such as un-matched chromosome/contig names. During running analysis, information about process is simultaneously showed in the same window.

After gene-level quantification, the expression matrix is look like below:


|   | Control_1 | Control_2  | Patient_1  | Patient_2  |  
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- | -------------  | ------------- 
| Gene_1  | 3  | 5  |  7  | 9
| Gene_2  | 30  | 40  |  50  | 60
| Gene_3  | 100  | 120  |  130  | 95

# Differential expression analysis with DESeq2 (Step 5)

After finishing of gene-level quantification, expression matrix is read in R computing environment to carry out differential expression analysis. Differential expression workflow is showed in below:

featureCounts_expression_matrix=read.delim("featureCounts_expression_matrix", header = T, row.names = 1) # reading of expression matrix in R.

head(featureCounts_FIZM011_read_counts) # Looking at first six rows of expression matrix.

expression_matrix_assignment=as.matrix(featureCounts_expression_matrix) # DESeq2 recognizes matrix data instead of list or data.frame, so our expression data must be assigned as a matrix.

storage.mode(expression_matrix)="numeric" # DESeq2 recognizes matrices at numeric-type, so our matrix must be assigned as the numeric.

To understand whether our data is both matrix and numeric or not:
typeof(), class(), str() functions can be used for this purpose. 


groups <- factor(c(rep("Controls",2),rep("Patients",2))) # Each sample group is assigned as the factor to make trait (phenotype) annotation. The first two columns of expression data are control groups, but last two columns are patient groups.

groups # Controlling of sample annotation. This step is very critical because If groups are assigned as the wrong, then differentially expressed genes between groups are gonna be wrong.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Filtration of genes with low expression:

min_read <- 1 
filtered_expression_data <- expression_matrix[apply(expression_matrix,1,function(x){max(x)}) > min_read,] # Row-wise filtration is performed in expression data to eliminate genes with low expression across samples. Low expressed genes might cause statistical noise and this might create a bias in result of analysis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

sampleInfo <- data.frame(groups,row.names=colnames(filtered_expression_data)) # Sample-trait annotation step.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Differential expression analysis:

dds <- DESeqDataSetFromMatrix(countData = filtered_expression_data, colData = sampleInfo, design = ~ groups)

dds$groups = relevel(dds$groups,"Controls")

dds <- DESeq(dds)

res <- results(dds,independentFiltering=F) # In this step, statistical analysis results are avaiable for all genes, but statistical meaningful and non-meaningful results are together.

To select only statistical meaningful results:

resSig <- res[(!is.na(res$padj) & (res$padj <= 0.05) & (abs(res$log2FoldChange)>= 1.5)), ] # In here, genes were selected with both adjusted p-value <=0.05 and log2FoldChange >=1.5. As the results, we obtained both statistical and biologically meaningful differentially expressed genes between patients and controls.

To write results to our computer from R computing environment:

write.csv(resSig, file="differential_expression_results_significant_genes.csv", quote=F)

Obtained file with .csv extension looks like below:


|   | baseMean | log2FoldChange  | IfcSE  | stat  | pvalue | padj 
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- | -------------  | ------------- | ------------- | -------------
| Gene_1  | 85.8220655465971  | -1.874026295362  |  0.266611865022727  | -7.02904311930098  | 0.00000000000207954712246367  | 0.0000000000755367230374539 
| Gene_2  | 98.2824885614715  | 2.15753251459839  |  0.60573737089831  | 3.56182830753658  | 0.00036828120481343  | 0.00214459983313731 
| Gene_3  | 412.438051846698  | 2.18571599360682  |  0.231625110250678  | 6.86459918229613  | 0.00000000000666782010218906   | 0.000000000218449038969323 

If you desire more detalied workflow of DESeq2, can visit https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/DESeq2.html website.

Best wishes.

-------------------------------------------------------- The End --------------------------------------------------------

